.TH SVLANG 1 "2026-02-15" "Daniel Nylander" "svlang Manual"
.SH NAME
svlang - Swedish NLP toolkit for translators
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B svlang
.RI [ GLOBAL_OPTIONS ]
.I COMMAND
.RI [ COMMAND_OPTIONS ]
.RI [ ARGS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBsvlang\fR is a comprehensive Swedish Natural Language Processing toolkit
designed specifically for translators and language professionals working
with Swedish text. It provides tools for detecting anglicisms (svengelska),
checking translation consistency across localization files, analyzing compound
word structure, calculating readability metrics, and performing dictionary lookups.

The toolkit is particularly useful for maintaining high-quality Swedish
translations, identifying potential language issues, and ensuring consistency
across large translation projects. It integrates well with other localization
tools and workflows.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-j ", " \-\-json
Output all results in JSON format for programmatic consumption and
integration with automation scripts. This affects the output format
of all commands and provides structured data suitable for parsing.
.TP
.BR \-q ", " \-\-quiet
Suppress non-essential output including progress indicators and
informational messages. Only display final results and error messages.
Useful for batch processing and integration with other tools.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Display version number, build information, and feature availability, then exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-about
Show comprehensive application information including version details,
supported features, data sources, and licensing information, then exit.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.BR svengelska " (alias: " sv ")"
Detect English loanwords, inappropriate anglicisms, and overuse of English
terms in Swedish text. This tool helps maintain authentic Swedish language
by identifying cases where Swedish equivalents would be more appropriate.
It uses comprehensive dictionaries of common anglicisms and provides
suggestions for Swedish alternatives where available.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-t " " \fITEXT\fR ", " \-\-text " " \fITEXT\fR
Directly specify text to analyze for anglicisms. The text should be
quoted to preserve spacing and special characters.
.TP
.BR \-f " " \fIFILE\fR ", " \-\-file " " \fIFILE\fR
Read text from the specified file for analysis. Supports plain text
files with UTF-8 encoding. The entire file content will be processed.
.RE
.TP
.BR consistency " (alias: " con ")"
Check translation consistency across multiple .po (gettext) or .ts (Qt Linguist)
localization files. This command identifies cases where the same source
string has been translated differently across files, which may indicate
inconsistencies that should be reviewed by translators.
.RS
.TP
.I FILES
One or more .po or .ts localization files to analyze. The tool will
compare translations of identical source strings across all specified files.
.TP
.BR \-i ", " \-\-ignore\-case
Perform case-insensitive comparison when checking for inconsistencies.
This can help identify variations that differ only in capitalization,
which may or may not be intentional depending on context.
.RE
.TP
.BR compound " (alias: " split ")"
Analyze and split Swedish compound words into their constituent parts.
Swedish frequently uses compound word formation, and this tool helps
understand word structure by breaking down complex compounds into
their component elements. Useful for translation analysis and
linguistic research.
.RS
.TP
.I WORDS
One or more Swedish compound words to analyze and split. Each word
will be processed separately and broken down into its identified
component parts with morphological analysis.
.RE
.TP
.B lix
Calculate the LIX (Läsbarhetsindex) readability index for Swedish text.
LIX is a readability formula specifically designed for Scandinavian languages
that measures text complexity based on sentence length and word complexity.
Lower values indicate easier-to-read text, while higher values suggest
more complex, academic-level writing.
.RS
.TP
.BR \-t " " \fITEXT\fR ", " \-\-text " " \fITEXT\fR
Directly specify text for readability analysis. The text should be
complete sentences for accurate assessment.
.TP
.BR \-f " " \fIFILE\fR ", " \-\-file " " \fIFILE\fR
Read text from the specified file for readability analysis. The entire
file content will be processed as a single document for scoring.
.RE
.TP
.BR lookup " (alias: " ord ")"
Perform Swedish-English dictionary lookups using data from Folkets lexikon,
a comprehensive collaborative dictionary. This tool provides translations,
definitions, and usage examples for Swedish and English words.
.RS
.TP
.I WORD
Word or phrase to look up in the dictionary. Supports both Swedish
and English input depending on the search direction specified.
.TP
.BR \-r ", " \-\-reverse
Perform English-to-Swedish lookup instead of the default Swedish-to-English
direction. Useful for finding Swedish translations of English terms.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-search
Enable prefix-based searching to find words that start with the given
text. This can help explore related terms and find words when only
partial spelling is known.
.TP
.BR \-n " " \fIN\fR ", " \-\-limit " " \fIN\fR
Maximum number of dictionary results to display (default: 20).
Larger values provide more comprehensive results but may produce
lengthy output.
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Command completed successfully without errors.
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred during processing (file not found, network issues,
invalid input, etc.).
.TP
.B 2
Warnings were found but processing completed successfully (e.g.,
anglicisms detected, inconsistencies found).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Check text for anglicisms:
.B svlang svengelska \-t "Vi behöver implementera en ny approach"
.TP
Analyze file for English loanwords:
.B svlang sv \-f translation.txt
.TP
Check consistency across translation files:
.B svlang consistency file1.po file2.po \-\-ignore\-case
.TP
Split compound words:
.B svlang compound "kontorsstol" "skrivbordslampa"
.TP
Calculate readability index for document:
.B svlang lix \-f document.txt
.TP
Look up Swedish word:
.B svlang lookup hund
.TP
Reverse lookup (English to Swedish):
.B svlang ord \-r dog \-\-limit 10
.TP
Search words by prefix:
.B svlang lookup \-s bil \-\-limit 15
.TP
JSON output for automation:
.B svlang svengelska \-t "test text" \-\-json
.TP
Quiet consistency check:
.B svlang consistency *.po \-\-quiet
.SH LIX READABILITY SCALE
The LIX readability index provides the following interpretation guidelines:
.RS 4
.B Below 25:
Very easy (children's books, simple instructions)
.br
.B 25-35:
Easy (popular fiction, newspapers)
.br
.B 35-45:
Medium (non-fiction, textbooks)
.br
.B 45-55:
Difficult (academic texts, technical documentation)
.br
.B Above 55:
Very difficult (research papers, complex technical texts)
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/svlang/
User configuration directory for custom settings and preferences.
.TP
.B ~/.config/svlang/anglicisms.json
Custom anglicism detection rules and Swedish alternatives.
.TP
.B ~/.cache/svlang/
Cache directory for downloaded dictionary data and linguistic resources.
.TP
.B ~/.cache/svlang/folkets-lexikon/
Cached data from Folkets lexikon dictionary service.
.SH DATA SOURCES
.B svlang
utilizes several linguistic resources:
.RS 4
.B Folkets lexikon:
Swedish-English dictionary data
.br
.B Custom anglicism database:
Curated list of English loanwords in Swedish
.br
.B Compound word analyzer:
Swedish morphological analysis rules
.br
.B LIX algorithm:
Standard Scandinavian readability measurement
.RE
.SH AUTHOR
Daniel Nylander <daniel@danielnylander.se>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR l10n-lint (1),
.BR po-translate (1),
.BR tp-lint (1),
.BR l10n-conv (1),
.BR msgfmt (1),
.BR msginit (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at: https://github.com/yeager/svlang/issues

Project homepage: https://github.com/yeager/svlang